Beyond Manual Planning: Seating Allocation for Large Organizations
Anton Ipsen1, Michael Cashmore1, Kirsty Fielding1,
Nicolas Marchesotti1, Parisa Zehtabi 1, Daniele Magazzeni1, Manuela Veloso1
1AI Research, J.P. Morgan Chase
1
Abstract
We introduce the Hierarchical Seating Allocation Problem
(HSAP) which addresses the optimal assignment of hier-
archically structured organizational teams to physical seat-
ing arrangements on a floor plan. This problem is driven
by the necessity for large organizations with large hierar-
chies to ensure that teams with close hierarchical relation-
ships are seated in proximity to one another, such as ensur-
ing a research group occupies a contiguous area. Currently,
this problem is managed manually leading to infrequent and
suboptimal replanning efforts.
To alleviate this manual process, we propose an end-to-
end framework to solve the HSAP. A scalable approach to
calculate the distance between any pair of seats using a
probabilistic road map (PRM) and rapidly-exploring random
trees (RRT) which is combined with heuristic search and dy-
namic programming approach to solve the HSAP using inte-
ger programming. We demonstrate our approach under dif-
ferent sized instances by evaluating the PRM framework and
subsequent allocations both quantitatively and qualitatively.
2
Introduction
In today’s dynamic work environment, commercial office
real estate has become one of the most significant fixed costs
for companies and organizations. The recent push by many
government departments and organizations for a full return
to the office has intensified the need to optimize this valu-
able resource. Unlike other assets, office real estate is not
easily expandable due to the prohibitive costs of renovations
and lengthy lease agreements. Therefore, the continuous re-
optimization of office space usage is essential to maximize
efficiency and adapt to changing needs. This ongoing evo-
lution in office space requirements has paved the way for
the application of automated planning methods in managing
office real estate.
A key challenge in this domain is the Seating Alloca-
tion (SA) problem, which involves assigning teams to of-
fice space on a floor plan. The SA problem has been previ-
ously explored in various contexts, such as allocating phys-
ical seats to different parties in government legislative bod-
ies (Hales and Garc´ıa 2019; Serafini 2012), and in response
to social-distancing measures following the COVID-19 pan-
demic (Barry et al. 2021; Stoll 2022). The objective of
the SA problem is to determine an allocation that ensures
team members are seated in proximity to one another, where
‘proximity’ is defined in terms of walkable space.
The Hierarchical Seating Allocation Problem (HSAP) ex-
tends the SA problem by aiming to allocate teams within an
organizational hierarchy to a floor plan. This extension is
motivated by the need to accommodate teams that belong
to multiple departments, thereby linking related teams to-
gether. Unlike the SA problem, the objective of the HSAP
is to assign teams to office space in such a way that teams
closer in the organizational hierarchy are seated closer to-
gether within the floor plan. The usefulness between HSA
and SA is significant to large organizations as the human-
evaluated solution quality to SA would be low due to failure
to accommodate linked departments.
The contributions of this paper are as follows: First, we
address the critical need for accurate distance estimation be-
tween seats by applying a scalable approach that utilizes
probabilistic roadmaps and rapidly-exploring random trees
to achieve more precise estimations. Secondly, we intro-
duce the Hierarchical Seating Allocation (HSA) problem
and demonstrate that it can be effectively addressed by de-
composing it into a series of Seating Allocation (SA) sub-
problems, which are solved using dynamic programming
techniques. Lastly, we extend the existing literature on the
SA problem by proposing a local search heuristic aimed at
improving the quality of existing solutions.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 3 we de-
scribe how to solve HSA by solving sub-problems of SA,
calculating distances (Section 3.1) and allocating seats (Sec-
tion 3.2). In Sections 4 and 4.2 we present our quantitative
and qualitative evaluations, and conclude in Section 5.
2.1
Related Problems
A related issue to the SA problem is the Office Space Allo-
cation (OSA) problem. The OSA is the problem of spatially
allocating people, entities or teams to a building or floor such
that the available space is optimized (Ulker 2013; Awadallah
et al. 2012). The key distinction between the SA and OSA
problems lies in their focus: the OSA problem is concerned
with allocating teams to a set of floors based on a set of
constraints, while the SA problem, given a valid allocation,
focuses on assigning teams to individual seats.
Another closely related problem to SA is the capacitated
p-median problem (CPMP). The CPMP involves selecting
arXiv:2602.05875v1  [cs.AI]  5 Feb 2026

p-medians (locations) from a finite set of medians to op-
timally serve a set of demand sites, such that each me-
dian does not exceed its associated capacity (Serafini 2012;
Ceselli and Righini 2005; Boccia et al. 2007). There have
been many proposed exact and heuristic approaches to solve
the CPMP, including Lagrangian Relaxations (Lorena and
Senne 2003), column generation (Lorena and Senne 2004),
local search heuristics (Lorena and Senne 2003), and math-
heuristics for solving large scale problems (Reese 2006; Ste-
fanello, de Ara´ujo, and M¨uller 2014; Gn¨agi and Baumann
2021). The SA problem can be viewed as a special case of
the CPMP where each median has an demand instead of a
capacity.
Using this framework the SA problem can be solved by
selecting a ‘central seat’ (median) of each team, and assign-
ing the required number of seats as close as possible to the
assigned ‘central seat’ such that each team’s desks demands
are satisfied. Given that the CPMP is proven to be NP-Hard,
utilizing its solution frameworks to solve the SA problem
is also NP-hard (Mu and Tong 2019). A direct optimization
approach could be employed to minimize the total seat dis-
tance between each seat, but this results in a mixed-integer
quadratic problem (MIQP), which is not scalable for large
instances due to the number of decision variables in the ob-
jective. A detailed formulation is provided in Appendix 1.
3
Framework
We will discuss in detail our proposed end-to-end frame-
work, which is divided into two key tasks: 1) calculating the
pairwise seat distances, and 2) allocating teams to specific
seats within the floor plan. The importance of these two tasks
is evident in the objective of the CPMP, where the goal is
to minimize the distance between seats and their designated
‘central seat’. Therefore, a pairwise seat distance matrix has
to be calculated as it serves as the input for the subsequent al-
location process. If the estimated distances between seats are
either overestimated or underestimated, it can lead to illogi-
cal allocations when evaluated by a human decision-maker.
Conversely, if the allocation framework in step 2 does not
adequately model human preferences, the solution quality,
as reviewed by a human, would similarly be poor.
The optimization of allocating teams to seats is formu-
lated as a combination of mathematical heuristics and Mixed
Integer Programming problems (Section 3.2). We will model
this as a multi-resource demand problem with two dis-
tinct desk types: desks and single-occupant offices. Single-
occupant offices are important in many organizations, as
high-ranking employees are usually allocated these spaces.
Going forward, we will refer to single-occupant offices sim-
ply as offices.
3.1
Estimating Pairwise Seat Distances
In this section, we present a method for obtaining high-
quality estimates of pairwise seat distances as identified on
floor plans. Following the approach of Barry et al. (2021),
we employ computer vision techniques and object detection
to parse floor plans, determining and mapping the locations
of desks and offices in the x, y-plane.
A naive approach to estimating walking distances be-
tween each pair of seats (including both desks and offices)
would be to use Manhattan or Euclidean distance. While
these methods are computationally efficient, they fail to ac-
count for non-traversable areas within a floor plan. This
oversight can lead to severe distance underestimation, po-
tentially resulting in team allocations on opposite sides of
walls, thereby significantly diminishing the quality of solu-
tions as evaluated by human experts.
Grid-based pathfinding algorithms such as A∗(Hart, Nils-
son, and Raphael 1968) and FastMap (Cohen et al. 2017)
exist, as do other efficient optimal mesh-based algorithms
(Hechenberger et al. 2022; Cui, Harabor, and Grastien
2017). However, the aforementioned approaches require an
efficient and sparse representation of the floor plan in or-
der to calculate the pairwise seat distances fast (Wu et al.
2021). For high resolution floor plans when projected into
x, y-plane, obtaining such efficient representations may re-
quire substantial manual editing. Similarly, finding an ade-
quate representation is also made difficult if the quality of
the provided floor plans is low. Moreover, for large organi-
zations with extensive office footprints, manually adjusting
each representation to compute optimal pairwise seat dis-
tances may be infeasible.
To overcome the representation challenges of exact meth-
ods and the underestimation issues of distance norm ap-
proaches, we propose constructing a probabilistic roadmap
(PRM) using rapidly-exploring random trees (RRT), aug-
mented with an additional connectivity check that auto-
matically connects seats within a threshold distance from
any reachable node of the PRM. In this context, a node
within the PRM can represent either a point used for
space exploration, a desk, or a single-occupant office. This
yields a fully-connected, undirected graph that effectively
approximates the walking distance between every pair of
seats (Kavraki et al. 1996; LaValle 1998). The process for
generating the PRM that connects a set of seat locations S
with at most K additional nodes is described in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: Generate PRM
1: Input: K, S, δc, δs
2: Output: PRM ⟨N, E⟩
3: xinit ←random collision-free position
4: N, E ←{xinit}, ∅
5: for all s ∈S do
6:
connected ←connect seat(s, N, E, δs)
7:
while ¬connected and |N| < K + |S| do
8:
xrand ←random collision-free position
9:
nnearest ←nearest neighbour(N, xrand)
10:
xnew ←cast(nnearest, xrand, δc)
11:
if xnew ̸= ⊥then
12:
E ←E∪new edges(xnew, N)
13:
N ←N ∪{xnew}
14:
connected ←connect seat(s, {xnew}, E, δs)
15:
end if
16:
end while
17: end for
18: return ⟨N, E⟩

The procedure is initialized with a set of seat positions
S
∈
R2 representing both desks and offices; a maxi-
mum number of additional nodes K and distance thresh-
olds δc, δs ∈R. The algorithm outputs a connected graph
of nodes N, corresponding to seats and intermediate posi-
tions, and edges E, representing collision-free connections
between nodes. The PRM is initialized as a single node ran-
domly sampled from any collision-free position on the floor
plan (line 3).
If all seats are connected, or the maximum number of
nodes is reached, the algorithm returns the resulting PRM,
as illustrated in Figure 1. If the algorithm fails to connect
all the seats, K can be increased, and the process repeated.
Once all seats are successfully connected, the PRM forms
a connected graph. This allows for the efficient calculation
of the shortest pairwise distances between seats using the
Floyd-Warshall algorithm, which operates with a time com-
plexity of O(n3).
The theoretical lower bound for the proposed PRM
method is the Euclidean distance. Since seats are connected
within a δs radius, and assuming δs = ∞the method is
lower bounded by the Euclidean distance, as every node
would be connected by the shortest possible path.
In the next section we will present several approaches to
solve the SA problem and the solution to the HSA problem.
3.2
Constrained Seat Allocation
The basic SA problem is defined as follows.
Definition 3.1 (Seat Allocation (SA)). A SA problem is a
tuple ⟨S, T, D⟩, in which S := Sd ∪So is the set of available
seats (desks and offices). T is the set of teams. Each team
t ∈T has an associated desk requirement dt ∈N and office
requirement ot ∈N. Lastly, D : s × s →R≥0 is the set of
pairwise distances between seats.
A solution to a SA problem is an assignment X : S →T,
such that for each team t the number of desks and offices
assigned meets its requirements. We measure the quality of
a solution by measuring the total distance between each seat
assigned to the team and the central seat of that team. That
is:
X
t∈T
X
s:X(s)=t
D(s, s′
t)
where s′
t is the central seat for team t, i.e. the seat that mini-
mizes:
arg min
s′∈S:X(s′)=t
X
s:X(s)=t
D(s, s′
t)
There are several other ways of measuring the quality of so-
lution such as minimizing the the maximum distance to any
given central seat.
Integer Program Seat Allocation (IPSA)
To solve the
SA we present an Integer Program (IP) that is adapted from
Hales and Garcia (2019) to include both desks and offices.
The idea of the IP is to find a central seat (centroid) for each
team and allocating required number of desks and offices
to the corresponding central seat to satisfy the associated
team’s demand. We define the binary variable xik as 1 if
seat i is allocated to central seat k, and the binary variable
ykt as 1 if seat k is the central seat for team t. Moreover, we
denote D(i, k) as the distance between seats i and k as cal-
culated by the PRM approach described in the section 3.1.
We denote the following method as Integer Program Seat
Allocation (IPSA).
min
X
i∈S,k∈S
D(i, k)xik
(1)
s.t.
X
k∈S
xik ≤1
∀i ∈S
(2)
X
t∈T
ykt ≤1
∀k ∈S
(3)
X
k∈S
ykt = 1
∀t ∈T
(4)
X
i∈Sd
xik =
X
t∈T
dtykt
∀k ∈S
(5)
X
i∈So
xik =
X
t∈T
otykt
∀k ∈S
(6)
The objective function in Eq. (1) minimizes the distances
between the seats allocated to their central seats. The con-
straints can be explained as follows:
• Eq. (2) stipulates that all seats are assigned to at most
one central seat. The equality sign is less-or-equal due to
scenarios where the total seat supply is higher total seat
demand.
• Eq. (3) describes that seat k can only be the central seat
of at most one team and Eq. (4) describes that each team
should have exactly one central seat.
• Eq. (5) and Eq. (6) stipulate that if seat k is central for
team t, then the required number of desks and offices for
team t must be assigned to central seat k.
The IPSA approach is computational expensive in prac-
tice due to the rapidly increasing number of variables in xik
(|S|2), which makes large-scale problems intractable. This
motivates the need for heuristics to reduce the computation-
ally complexity.
Iterative Clustering Algorithm (ICA)
To bridge the gap
between optimality and scalability, we present a heuristic ap-
proach to SA that decomposes the problem into two phases:
(1) selecting central seats, (2) allocating seats to teams.
We refer to these phases as location and allocation, re-
spectively (Hales and Garc´ıa 2019). The heuristic approach
closely resembles an iterative k-means clustering algorithm.
In each iteration, the centroid of each cluster is updated (lo-
cation), followed by the allocation of seats to their nearest
centroid (allocation). The overall approach is described in
Algorithm 2.
Before any iteration begins, an initial central seat is as-
signed to each team (line 3). This is done by one of two
methods: randomization or k-means++ (Arthur and Vassil-
vitskii 2007). We refer to the first approach as ICA, and
the second as ICA++. To solve the allocation problem, we
use an integer programming approach (line 7). We begin by
defining st as the central seat allocated to team t. Addition-
ally, we introduce a binary variable xit, which is 1 if seat i is

Figure 1: Output of the PRM algorithm when applied to a synthetic floor plan. The hyper-parameters for δc and δs were
manually tuned until the algorithm converged with a node limit of K = 2000.
allocated to team t. This leads us to the following optimiza-
tion problem:
min
X
i∈S,t∈T
D(i, st)xit
(7)
s.t.
X
t∈T
xit ≤1
∀i ∈S
(8)
X
i∈Sd
xit = dt
∀t ∈T
(9)
X
i∈So
xit = ot
∀t ∈T
(10)
The constraints and objective function are similar to those
defined for the IPSA.
• The objective function (7) minimizes the sum of dis-
tances between each seat and its central seat.
• Eq. (8) stipulates that all seats are allocated to at most
one team.
• Eq. (9) and Eq. (10) stipulate that each team must be al-
located the required desks and offices.
The location phase updates the location of the central
seats to minimize (7). This is done by assigning a new cen-
tral seat to each team that minimizes:
¯St = arg min
s∈S
X
i∈S
D(i, s)xit
That is, the new central seat is the seat already allocated to
that team which has the smallest total distance to all other
seats allocated to that team (line 8).
This process repeats until the central seats remain un-
changed (lines 9-10) or the maximum number of repetitions
is reached, at which point the iteration stops and the current
allocation is returned. The ICA is easier to solve than the
IPSA due to fewer decision variables and number of vari-
ables in xit is (|T| × |S|) as |T| ≤|S| for all feasible prob-
lems.
Algorithm 2: Location-Allocation Heuristic
1: Input:
Seats
S,
teams
T,distance
matrix
D,init,max iterations
2: Output: allocation X
3: ct ←1
4: X ←∅
5: St ←init(S, T)
6: while ct ≤max iterations do
7:
X ←allocation(S, T, D, St)
8:
¯St ←location(S, T, D, X)
9:
if ¯St = St ∀t ∈T then
10:
return X
11:
end if
12:
St ←¯St
13:
ct ←ct + 1
14: end while
15: return X
Greedy Seat Allocation (GSA)
In this subsection we
present a greedy algorithm as a tractable baseline to the
IPSA method. GSA algorithm allocates desks and offices
to teams based on the capacity of selected central seats in
a greedy manner. The initial set of central seats is allocated
using a k-means++ clustering approach (Arthur and Vassil-
vitskii 2007). Then the subsequent allocation phase of the
greedy approach is an adapted version of a capacity-based
greedy method proposed by Gn¨agi and Baumann (2021).
The detailed steps of this allocation process are outlined in
Algorithm 3.
The assignment order of each seat is determined using the
regret function proposed by Mulvey and Beck (1984). For

each seat s, we compute the regret value rs = D(s, c′) −
D(s, c′′), where c′ and c′′ are the first and second nearest
central seat, respectively (lines 5-6). A higher regret value
suggests a greater potential increase in the objective function
if the seat were reassigned to a different central seat. Next,
the assignment order function calculates the order in which
teams are considered for seat s. Teams are prioritized based
on their proximity to the seat’s central seat (line 9), ensuring
that the seat is allocated to the nearest possible team. Finally,
each seat s is iteratively evaluated for allocation to team t
contingent on whether the team’s office and desk require-
ments have been fulfilled.The allocation sequence is guided
by the regret values, and for each seat, team consideration
follows the assignment order (lines 10-21).
Once the allocation phase is complete the central seats
are relocated (Algorithm 2 line 8). The process repeats until
we hit the maximum number of iterations, or the location
of central seats has stabilized at which point the algorithm
outputs a solution, X (Algorithm 2 lines 6-14).
Algorithm 3: Greedy Allocation
1: Input: Seats S,teams T,distance matrix D
2: Output: Seating Allocation X
3: St ←initial central seats st ∈S for each team, t
4: X ←∅
5: for seat s ∈S do
6:
rs ←D(s, c′) −D(s, c′′)
7: end for
8: for s ∈S ordered by decreasing rs do
9:
At ←assignment order(s, St, T, D)
10:
for t ∈At do
11:
if s ∈So ∧ot > 0 then
12:
X(s) = t
13:
ot ←ot −1
14:
break
15:
else if s ∈Sd ∧dt > 0 then
16:
X(s) = t
17:
dt ←dt −1
18:
break
19:
end if
20:
end for
21: end for
22: return X
Local Search Heuristic (LS)
In this subsection, we pro-
pose a simple local neighborhood search heuristic (LS) to
improve the solutions generated in the previous sections.
The local search heuristic starts from an initial incumbent
solution X∗. LS attempts to solve the IPSA problem by
only considering, for any current central seat in X∗, the sn-
nearest neighbors seats as new candidates for central seats.
Additionally, since X∗is a valid feasible solution, it is used
as a warm start for the reduced-dimensionality IPSA prob-
lem. In this way, LS will only improve the current solution,
or will terminate with the current solution as the best incum-
bent. Additionally, the LS method has sn × |T| number of
candidates central seat which in many instances is less than
|S|×|T|. The notation of each decision variable follows that
Company A
Sales
EU Sales
US Sales
Sales Engineering
Engineering
R&D Engineering
Marketing
Ads
Digital
Figure 2: An example organizational hierarchy. Each node
corresponds to a team and each child node is a member of
its own team and its parent team.
of the IPSA method. We denote S∗
c as the set of seats that
are sn-nearest neighbors to the central seats selected in X∗.
Then we can define the local search optimization procedure
as:
min
X
i∈I,k∈S∗
c
D(i, k)xik
(11)
s.t.
X
k∈S∗
c
xik ≤1
∀i ∈S
(12)
X
i∈Sd
xik =
X
t∈T
dtykt
∀k ∈S∗
c
(13)
X
i∈So
xik =
X
t∈T
otykt
∀k ∈S∗
c
(14)
X
t∈T
ykt ≤1
∀k ∈S∗
c
(15)
X
k∈S∗
c
ykt = 1
∀t ∈T
(16)
The constraints and objective function in the above formula-
tion follows exactly the definition of IPSA.
3.3
Hierarchical Seat Allocation
Consider the organizational hierarchy as depicted in Fig-
ure 2. Company A is considered the root team, whereas
Sales is a parent team along with Engineering and Market-
ing. Sales has several child teams that we aim to have the
members seated together. A solution must allocate seats to
the child teams such that their office and desk requirements
are satisfied. Additionally, the solution must minimize the
distance between the assigned seats of child teams of each
parent team. For instance in Figure 2, it is desired that the
distance between EU Sales, US Sales and Sales Engineering
must be minimized, and thus their seats must come from the
seats allocated to its parent team, Sales.

The HSAP is mathematically defined as follows.
Definition 3.2 (Hierarchical Seat Allocation Problem
(HSAP)). An HSAP is a tuple ⟨S, H, D⟩, in which S :=
Sd ∪So is the set of available seats (desks and offices). H
is the organizational hierarchy with H levels in which Tl
denotes the set of teams at level l. Each team t ∈Tl has
an associated desk requirement dt ∈N, office requirement
ot ∈N, and when l > 0 a parent team t′ ∈Tl−1. Lastly,
D : s × s →R≥0 is the set of pairwise distances between
seats.
A team with no child teams is referred to as a leaf team.
Note that the office and desk requirements of non-leaf teams
(branch teams) are equal to the sum of the requirements of
their child teams.
A team without a parent is denoted as a root team. Note
that it is possible that the hierarchy has several root teams,
and could be represented as a set of trees.
A solution to an HSAP is a set of allocations X :=
{X0, . . . XL}. Each allocation Xl ∈X is a mapping Xl :
S →Tl from seats to teams at that level, such that for each
team t ∈Xl the number of desks and offices assigned to
that team meets its requirements. Also, the assignment to a
non-root team in level l+1 must not violate that of its parent
at level t. That is, teams at level l + 1 must be assigned to
seats that were previously allocated to their parent at level l.
The solution quality for HSAP is measured in the same
way as SA (total distance of each seat to its team’s central
seat). However, for the HSAP we take the sum of this met-
ric at every level in the hierarchy. Importantly, the branch
teams serve as a mechanism of creating structure and syn-
ergy in the hierarchical allocations, whereas the leaf teams
are the teams that functionally have to be located as close as
possible.
Solving the HSAP problem as a single monolithic in-
stance is intractable for small, medium and large scale in-
stances (i.e. over 50 seats). Therefore, we propose a decom-
position of the hierarchical seating problem into a series of
SA subproblems that can be solved independently using the
proposed heuristics in Section 3.2.
Depth First Hierarchical Seat Allocation (DF-HSA)
To
address the challenge of allocating an organizational hierar-
chy of teams we introduce the DF-HSA algorithm. As the
allocation of each team in level l is constrained by the allo-
cation of seats to teams in level l −1, the problem naturally
decomposes into a set of SA problems that can be solved se-
quentially. Thus, we use a dynamic programming approach
to allocate the hierarchy in a top-down, depth-first approach,
in which each sub-problem involves solving a single SA in-
stance.
The algorithm is initially called with a set of empty al-
locations (Xl = ∅, ∀Xl ∈X), root teams T, and level
l = 0. Seats are allocated by a recursive (depth-first) traver-
sal through the organizational hierarchy (line 3-9). At each
step of this traversal, teams are first allocated seats (line 2).
This allocation is performed using any solution to SA, such
as those described in the previous section. Then, each team’s
children are allocated seats through a recursive call (line 7).
Algorithm 4: Depth First Hierarchical Seat Allocation (DF-
HSA)
1: Input: Seating allocation algorithm SA, seats S, teams
T,distance matrix D,previous allocation X,iteration l
2: Xl ←Xl ∪SA(S, T, D)
3: for team t ∈T do
4:
S′ ←{s : Xl(s) = t}
5:
T ′ ←children(t)
6:
if T ′ ̸= ∅then
7:
Call DF −HSA(SA, S′, T ′, D, X, l + 1)
8:
end if
9: end for
10: return Xl
The children of a team (line 5) can only be assigned seats
that were allocated to their parent (line 4).
The DF-HSA algorithm is not globally optimizing every
level at once as each level builds on the previous level’s al-
location.
Delayed Office Selection
When allocating offices in the
first iteration of the DF-HSA poor allocation choices can
be made in the first levels of the hierarchy due to the lack of
knowledge as to which leaf teams those offices are aligned.
We observe that this leads to allocations in which offices are
allocated far from their team, but there were obvious better
selections to make if there had been more information about
office alignment while allocating higher levels of the orga-
nizational hierarchy.
We tackle this issue by the delaying office allocation de-
cision. We propose a combined top-down-bottom-up ap-
proach, in which first desks are allocated using the HSA
scheme described above, and then offices are allocated at
the lowest level of leaf teams.
From the DF-HSA procedure, we can also extrapolate
the central seats for each team, which we can use to allocate
office as close to the central seat of the teams as possible.
The office allocation step is a simple form of the ICA ap-
proach. We define xit as 1 if office i is allocated to team
t ∈T. We denote SO, as the set of available offices. Simi-
larly to Section 3.2 we already know for each team the cen-
tral seat st. Lastly, we denote ot as the office requirements
of team t.
min
X
i∈So,t∈T
D(i, st)xit
(17)
s.t.
X
t∈T
xit ≤1
∀i ∈So
(18)
X
i∈So
xit = ot
∀t ∈T
(19)
The constraints closely follow the ICA approach, and
thus (17) defines the total distance from offices to their cen-
tral seats, (18) defines that every office can only be allocated
to one team and (19) defines that each team must be allo-
cated offices equal to its requirements.

(a) Hierarchy Level 1
(b) Hierarchy Level 2
(c) Color legend
Figure 3: Depicts the output of the HSA-DF algorithm with local search heuristics as applied to the organizational hierarchy
as described in Figure 2 with the floor plan from Figure 1. In total the population required 103 desks and 6 offices, leaving 3
vacant desks.
4
Evaluation
We assess the performance of the proposed methods from
both a quantitative and qualitative perspective. Quantita-
tively, we report the mean distance from a seat to the cor-
responding central seat, averaged over all levels. We mea-
sure solution quality in three different floor plan instances to
gauge the efficacy for different teams sizes and floor com-
plexity. The organizational hierarchy for each instance en-
compasses up to 5 different levels:
• Small Instance: Capacity of floor: 172 desks and 26 of-
fices. Team Requirements: 167 desks and 12 offices
• Medium Instance: Capacity of floor: 275 desks and 27
offices. Team requirements: 245 desks and 23 offices.
• Large Instance: Capacity of floor: 966 desks and 31 of-
fices. Team requirements: 843 desks and 22 offices.
Note that the unit of the distance reported is pixels (of
the floor plan image) and as a result we do not com-
pare distances between floor plans. We ran the solver using
Python 3.8 and CPLEX 12.9 (CPLEX 2017). Each instance
is solved by considering a total of 5 levels from the organi-
zational hierarchy, with results averaged over 30 runs.
4.1
Quantitative Evaluation
We compare results of solving the SA sub-problems with
the different SA methods defined in Section 3.2. The setting
of the evaluation is that of the human-decision maker. The
task to generate seating allocation plans itself is an iterative
process. The human decision maker will generate different
solutions for a given allocation and then adjust those solu-
tions continuously in response to feedback, changing busi-
ness constraints, and in the case where the building is being
constructed – changing floor plans. Generating seating sce-
narios to compare differing constraints necessitates the need
for fast floor plan iteration.
With this in mind, we limit the execution time of each SA
sub-problem to a total of 10 minutes to mimic an online allo-
cation scenario. Additionally, the SA sub-problem is solved
with ICA plus Local Search (ICS+LS) and the number of
neighbors is limited to sn = 5.
Similarly, for the IPSA approach we do not report the
standard deviation for the run time, as only one run was per-
formed, due to it being solved to optimality. The complete
results are reported in Table 1.
The results shows the IPSA approach across all heuristic
methods has the lowest total average distance to central seat
across all levels and methods except for the largest instance.
The IPSA method performs worse in larger scale instances
as the time limit is often reached before the optimality gap
is closed by the solver due to its quadratic variable scaling
in |S|.
Our results indicate that ICA + LS outperforms other
heuristics, but at a slightly increased execution time cost due
to the local search procedure in small and medium instance.
However, ICA + LS converges slowly in large instances as
the local search IP procedure is based on the IPSA prob-
lem formulation which in our instances did not scale with
increased sizing of |S| Lastly, we observe that using the k-
means++ approach slightly improves the objective function
compared to the ICA approach with little to no cost to the
execution time. Empirically, varying |S| or |T| across dif-
ferent instances is insufficient to gauge the time-to-solution,
as the difficulty and structure of the organizational hierarchy
can vary unpredictably. Therefore, we cannot quantitatively
conclude which method performs better across different car-
dinalities of S or T.
4.2
Qualitative Evaluation
As stated earlier the human-evaluated solution quality is
both affected by the estimation of pairwise seat distances
and the team-to-seat allocation optimization. Therefore, we
will conduct a qualitative evaluation of both contributions.
To evaluate the impact of an improved distance estima-
tion framework for estimating pair-wise seat distances, we
conducted a toy example as seen in Figure 5. The setup of
the toy example is that we have 4 teams and 4 separate ar-
eas divided by impassable walls. Two of the teams are too

Small
Medium
Large
Method
Metrics
Delayed Office Decision
True
False
True
False
True
False
IPSA
Central Seat Distance
318.8
308.8
936.5
930.9
272.7
289.6
Office Distance
545.2
492.0
1076.4
1036.8
519.7
479.5
Exec. Time (s)
95.49±−
139.0±−
629.5±−
647.8±−
3748.4±−
3708.5±−
Greedy
Algorithm
Central Seat Distance
-
438.8
-
1506.9
-
571.2
Office Distance
-
882.2
-
1664.1
-
963.8
Exec. Time (s)
-
1.2±0.3
-
1.5±0.4
-
14.6±1.9
ICA
Central Seat Distance
337.9
336.9
976.3
968.7
284.1
286.2
Office Distance
548.1
518.4
1075.3
1081.8
513.7
604.5
Exec. Time (s)
6.2±0.5
2.8±0.6
6.7±0.3
2.6±0.5
62.1±5.8
34.0±5.9
ICA++
Central Seat Distance
331.9
329.6
969.25
965.2
281.6
283.0
Office Distance
546.2
510.5
1091.4
1035.4
513.9
618.6
Exec. Time (s)
6.1±0.5
2.6±0.6
6.5±0.3
2.5±0.4
60.7±5.5
33.2±6.9
ICA + LS
Central Seat Distance
329.05
331.54
961.95
950.22
273.4
274.2
Office Distance
551.3
506.9
1112.9
1037.35
515.0
540.8
Exec. Time (s)
9.9±2.0
6.5±1.7
8.3±0.4
4.2±0.3
956.2±207.9
987.9±227.6
Table 1: Quantitative evaluation of different approaches by using the DF-HSA algorithm. We highlight the lowest heuristic
result in each column with bold. We report both the average execution time along with the standard error.
(a) Small
(b) Medium
(c) Large
Figure 4: Depicts the effect on total office distance per level of DF-HSA across all methods. Note how delaying the office
decision enables higher level hierarchy teams to on average sit closer to their aligned offices. This is beneficial as the purpose
of the HSA framework is to allocate leaf teams while considering their branch parent’s team.
large for any given area and have to be split to one or more
other areas by the allocation algorithm. Although the allo-
cation solutions appear similar at first, the differences are
significant. When using the Euclidean distance, more teams
are split between areas due to the underestimation of seat
distances caused by physically impassable walls. This effect
is particularly evident in the green team, which is divided
into a trapezoid shape in Figure 5(a). Consequently, while
the two optimization metrics yield similar numerical results
the quality of the solution, as assessed by human evaluators,
differs.
Additionally, Figure 5(b) illustrates the gap between con-
straint optimization and human preferences. Although the
optimization procedure was solved to optimality, a human
decision-maker might choose to manually relocate the two
teal seats in the top right quadrant to be adjacent, even if this
adjustment slightly reduces the overall optimization objec-
tive.
Next, we will highlight a few of our observations re-
lated to the solution quality generated by the framework
which serves as guidance to understanding the strengths and
weaknesses of the methods proposed. An example output
of the HSA problem can be seen in Figure 3, where we
have solved the SA sub-problems with ICA+LS. The fig-
ure shows the allocation of an organizational hierarchy with
multiple teams to a floor plan.
When qualitatively comparing the three ICA heuris-
tics, we did not observe a significant difference in human-
evaluated solution quality for small and medium-scale in-
stances.
Interestingly, when pairwise seat distances are estimated
using the PRM method, the resulting allocation forms a ball
shape. This is because nodes are connected if they are within
a δs radius of each other. Importantly, the framework used

(a) Euclidean Distance
(b) Allocation with PRM+RRT Distance
Figure 5: Toy example allocation of 4 teams being allocated to a total of 42 seats which are physically separated by four gray-
colored walls using IPSA framework with different seat distance estimation methods.
for distance estimation directly impacts the resulting alloca-
tion. The ball-shaped output from using PRM may not be
ideal for open and densely packed office floor plans. How-
ever, in floor plans with greater distances between seats,
the ball-shaped allocation was less pronounced. In scenar-
ios where seats are densely arranged in long rows, it may
be more effective to explore approaches that aim to find the
smallest bounding box for each team or another framework.
Future work should try to improve the disconnect between
the constrained programming and human-evaluated solution
quality by studying in which scenarios different solution
methods and distance estimation techniques performs best.
5
Conclusion
Our contributions are twofold: (1) we introduce a novel ap-
proach for calculating pairwise seat distances to overcome
representation problems for high resolution floor plans, and
(2) introduce the hierarchical seating allocation problem
(HSAP). We compute pairwise seat distances by accounting
for impassable physical walls using PRM and RRT meth-
ods. Additionally, we propose new techniques for consider-
ing organizational hierarchies to allocate seats to teams at
any hierarchical level within a floor plan. The solution to
the HSAP is formulated as a mixed-integer programming
problem, which is decomposed into several sub-problems
that can be efficiently solved as individual seating allocation
(SA) problems.
We also introduce several innovative methods for solv-
ing a multi-resource SA problem, along with a local search
heuristic that can significantly enhance incumbent solutions
for small and medium-scale instances without substantially
increasing execution time.
Future work could focus on developing a dynamic
pipeline to determine the most suitable algorithm(s) based
on the size and complexity of each subproblem could be
beneficial. For the former, inspiration could be drawn from
Gn¨agi and Baumann (2021) to create a more robust local
search procedure. For the latter, the pipeline devised by Ste-
fanello, de Araujo, and M¨uller (2014) could be adapted for
this purpose.
6
Disclaimer.
This paper was prepared for informational purposes by the
Artificial Intelligence Research group of JPMorgan Chase &
Co. and its affiliates (“JP Morgan”), and is not a product of
the Research Department of JP Morgan. JP Morgan makes
no representation and warranty whatsoever and disclaims
all liability, for the completeness, accuracy or reliability
of the information contained herein. This document is not
intended as investment research or investment advice, or a
recommendation, offer or solicitation for the purchase or
sale of any security, financial instrument, financial product
or service, or to be used in any way for evaluating the merits
of participating in any transaction, and shall not constitute a
solicitation under any jurisdiction or to any person, if such
solicitation under such jurisdiction or to such person would
be unlawful.
©2026 JPMorgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved.

References
Arthur, D.; and Vassilvitskii, S. 2007. K-Means++: The Ad-
vantages of Careful Seeding. In Proceedings of the Eigh-
teenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algo-
rithms, SODA ’07, 1027–1035. USA: Society for Industrial
and Applied Mathematics. ISBN 9780898716245.
Awadallah, M. A.; Khader, A. T.; Al-Betar, M. A.; and
Woon, P. C. 2012. Office-space-allocation problem using
harmony search algorithm. In International Conference on
Neural Information Processing, 365–374.
Barry, M.; Gambella, C.; Lorenzi, F.; Sheehan, J.; and Ploen-
nigs, J. 2021. Optimal Seat Allocation Under Social Dis-
tancing Constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.05017.
Boccia, M.; Sforza, A.; Sterle, C.; and Vasilyev, I. 2007.
A Cut and Branch Approach for the Capacitated p-Median
Problem Based on Fenchel Cutting Planes. Journal of Math-
ematical Modelling and Algorithms, 7(1): 43–58.
Ceselli, A.; and Righini, G. 2005. A branch-and-price al-
gorithm for the capacitated p-median problem. Networks,
45(3): 125–142.
Cohen, L.; Uras, T.; Jahangiri, S.; Arunasalam, A.; Koenig,
S.; and Kumar, T. K. S. 2017. The FastMap Algorithm for
Shortest Path Computations. arXiv:1706.02792.
CPLEX, I. I. 2017. V12. 7: User’s Manual for CPLEX. In-
ternational Business Machines Corporation.
Cui, M. L.; Harabor, D. D.; and Grastien, A. 2017.
Compromise-free pathfinding on a navigation mesh. In Pro-
ceedings of the 26th International Joint Conference on Arti-
ficial Intelligence, IJCAI’17, 496–502. AAAI Press. ISBN
9780999241103.
Gn¨agi, M.; and Baumann, P. 2021. A matheuristic for large-
scale capacitated clustering. Computers and Operations Re-
search, 132: 105304.
Hales, R. O.; and Garc´ıa, S. 2019. Congress seat allocation
using mathematical optimization. TOP, 27(3): 426–455.
Hart, P. E.; Nilsson, N. J.; and Raphael, B. 1968. A For-
mal Basis for the Heuristic Determination of Minimum Cost
Paths. IEEE Transactions on Systems Science and Cyber-
netics, 4(2): 100–107.
Hechenberger, R.; Harabor, D.; Cheema, M. A.; Stuckey,
P. J.; and Bodic, P. L. 2022.
Multi-target search in eu-
clidean space with ray shooting (full version). arXiv preprint
arXiv:2207.02436.
Kavraki, L.; Svestka, P.; Latombe, J.-C.; and Overmars, M.
1996.
Probabilistic roadmaps for path planning in high-
dimensional configuration spaces.
IEEE Transactions on
Robotics and Automation, 12(4): 566–580.
LaValle, S. M. 1998. Rapidly-exploring random trees: A
new tool for path planning.
Technical report, Iowa State
University.
Lorena, L. A.; and Senne, E. L. 2004. A column generation
approach to capacitated p-median problems. Computers and
Operations Research, 31(6): 863–876.
Lorena, L. A. N.; and Senne, E. L. F. 2003. Local Search
Heuristics for Capacitated p-Median Problems. Networks
and Spatial Economics, 3(4): 407–419.
Mu, W.; and Tong, D. 2019.
On solving large p-median
problems. Environment and Planning B: Urban Analytics
and City Science, 47(6): 981–996.
Mulvey, J. M.; and Beck, M. P. 1984. Solving capacitated
clustering problems. European Journal of Operational Re-
search, 18(3): 339–348.
Reese, J. 2006. Solution methods for thep-median problem:
An annotated bibliography. Networks, 48(3): 125–142.
Serafini, P. 2012. Allocation of the EU Parliament seats via
integer linear programming and revised quotas. Mathemati-
cal Social Sciences, 63(2): 107–113.
Stefanello, F.; de Ara´ujo, O. C. B.; and M¨uller, F. M. 2014.
Matheuristics for the capacitated p-median problem. Inter-
national Transactions in Operational Research, 22(1): 149–
167.
Stoll, M. 2022. Solutions to the Distance Constrained Cin-
ema Seating Problem. Master Thesis, Utrecht University.
Ulker, O. 2013. Office space allocation by using mathemati-
cal programming and meta-heuristics. Ph.D. thesis, Univer-
sity of Nottingham.
Wu, Z.; Meng, Z.; Zhao, W.; and Wu, Z. 2021. Fast-RRT:
A RRT-Based Optimal Path Finding Method. Applied Sci-
ences, 11(24): 11777.

7
Appendix
7.1
Appendix 1
We define the binary variable xt,j as 1 if team t is allocated seat j and 0 otherwise. Similarly to Section 3.2, we define ot and
dt as the office and desk requirement of team t respectively, and S as the set of all seats and Sd and So as the set of desk and
office respectively. This yields the following mixed integer quadratic (MIQP) formulation as it is quadratic in the objective:
min
X
t∈T,k∈S,j∈S
D(k, j)xtkxtj
(20)
s.t.
X
t∈T
xtk ≤1
∀k ∈S
(21)
X
ks∈Sd
xtks = dt
∀t ∈T
(22)
X
ko∈So
xtko = ot
∀t ∈T
(23)
The constraints can be explained as follows:
• The objective in Eq. 20 minimizes the total pairwise distance to each allocated seat for each team.
• Eq. 21 describes that a seat can only be allocated to at most one team.
• Eq. 22 and equation 23 describes that each team must get allocated the number of desks and office to satisfy its demand for
each of the respective resources.
